Hello, welcome to another episode of No Hay Toss. This is a podcast for Spanish students who want to listen to conversations, obviously in Spanish, between two teachers, which are Beto and me. Besides the conversations we have, we also explain some grammar topics, colloquial expressions used in Mexico, and other things. But before starting this episode, we have to thank our latest patrons. They are Derek Shamron, Pacrop, Zachary Emmons, Jonathan Froese, I think it's pronounced. Probably. Ronald Reynolds, Mark Mullis, Austin Noé, and Jeff Hoffman. The good Jeff Hoffman. Greetings, Jeff. I hope the apartment thing gets resolved soon. You know, Héctor, how the real estate sector is. There was a problem with something he bought. But greetings to Puerto Vallarta, Jeff. Take care, looking forward to talking to you soon. And well, if you want to belong to this super, ultra, mega exclusive Patreon community, where you'll have access to transcripts, show notes, ad-free episodes, where you can ask us whatever you want, among other things, our site is noaitospodcast.com. How are you doing, Héctor? What's going on over there in Navajearte? In Navajearte? What's up? Not much, dude. Well, you know we're in the Independence month. Yes, yes. Did you go to the shout? No, man, I didn't go. No way. Actually, I have some friends who are my neighbors. And, well, neighbors not from the building, but from the neighborhood, let's say. Uh-huh. And they did go. And they went to see the shout. I said, no way, it's going to be packed. And indeed, they told me there were a lot of people, but... Yes. But it wasn't like bursting, you know? I mean... So it was a little sad. No, no, no. There were people. It was full. It was in the Zócalo. Banda MS was there. Oh, man. A song and I had to take off that thing. Not Banda MS. It was on TV. No, I didn't have it. There are songs that I do like from Banda MS. Hey, but... Uh-huh. Yes. So, yes. I mean, do you feel patriotic this month? More or less, more or less. Yes, I think you always see the flags, you know, on cars and the ads that say "Here we sell chile en nogada". Uh-huh. Uh-huh. But also, you know what, a few days ago I was looking at a post there on Reddit. You know I'm a fan of Reddit. It was like a photo of a... Well, an image of a restaurant. I mean, they had a sign in the restaurant. And it said something like... We ask you not to leave a tip if your waiter is not friendly, attentive, and not committed to good service. Wow. Here the waiters... Well, I think it's talking about waitresses. I don't know, I suppose maybe all are women. Uh-huh. They have a fixed salary. The tip should be an incentive for outstanding service. Okay. And I said, wow, that's crazy, right? That they put that. I don't know, I think the issue of tips is something that... Well, in Mexico and in the world, it's always like... Especially now, right? It's something people talk about. Yes. Yes, yes, yes. But... And it has been like... Well, I think in general... I was going to say there are two sides. But generally, I hear that people are a bit fed up with tips. Uh-huh. And I always hear the same argument, right? Oh, no, man, better pay them more, right? That the owner pays them more, but... And I understand that. I used to think that too. But now I say, man, imagine if they paid them a salary... How do they call it? A livable wage in Mexico City, right? So you can have your apartment there in Roma Norte. Uh-huh. I mean, that restaurant wouldn't be able to exist, man. They would have to charge like five times more for the food, no? Uh-huh. So on one hand, they're almost forced to depend on the tip, which isn't cool either. It also has its bad side. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. I mean, especially when it's something expected, right? Like... I mean, it doesn't matter if I gave you good service, you have to give me 10% minimum. That's not... That's not cool. And 10% is low, huh? Compared to other countries. Yes, yes. I think here, most people, I mean, locals... If you want to be local, leave a 10% tip. Yes. There's nothing that will make you more Mexican than that. I think, right? But... Yes. But yes, I think it's a system, I mean... Yeah, like you said, if raising their salary is going to imply raising the price of... Well, yes, of the products... Exactly. Well, that's tough, right? Unfortunately, we already live in a society where we're used to tips and that's kind of the way that... Well, yes, that's how they survive. Yes. How they can, I don't know, like, pay their bills, the waiters. Yes. And yes, maybe it's not the best way, but it is what it is. Exactly. Exactly. Look, the problem also is that I had heard that sometimes the restaurants keep a percentage of the tips. No. Seriously? Yes, man. I mean, yes, yes, yes. That's a common practice, you know? That, I don't know, the waiters or the people... Because in the end, I don't know how it is, but if it's a big restaurant, well, they divide the tips among everyone. I mean, it's not just all the waiters, I don't know, the hostesses, the guy at the cash register. I think they share it among all. But imagine the business keeps, I don't know, almost half of the tip they're earning. No. I mean, so what should I do? I mean, should I give the tip to the waiter in cash? Like, in their hand, you know, like the classic corruption meme. Just give it to them and say, hey, man, this is for you. Yes. Well, I think, I don't know, that's what they say, that also giving the tip in cash is the most direct way it will get to the waiters or the service people. But also, who knows? I mean, and today, look, you don't have cash in your wallet. I bet if you open it right now, you don't even have 20 pesos. Yes, you probably are right, huh? Yes. So, it's tough, man. I mean, it's a difficult situation with this tip thing. Yes, yes. But well, at least, I don't know, well, Mexico City is more, trends start there. But for example, here if you go to Starbucks and you pay for your coffee there, I think they don't ask you for a tip, huh? No, but yes, I mean, well, I mean, already, but here they do ask you, do you want to add something for the service or something like that? Even if you go there to Starbucks, man, to Shake Shack, they do ask you, I mean, even if you're just receiving your order there, they ask if you want to add 10%, no way. I mean, that's already overstepping, yeah? Overstepping, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, a haul, for not saying something else. But yes, I think there are more businesses asking for tips. Yes. I mean, I would never give a peso to the person at Shake Shack on the other side. I mean, because look, my philosophy is, if you make me stand up for anything, that's it, man, you already eliminated the possibility. It's like the buffet. I mean, when you say, ah, the buffet, I say, no, I don't want a buffet. I didn't come to a restaurant to have to serve myself. Uh-huh. Ok. So I don't like that. I mean, that's where you give your tip, you earn it with the service, right? Yeah. With the service you give, right? I mean, is everything okay, do you need anything, it feels nice when someone serves you like that, right? Sure. And gladly you give even, I don't know, more than 15, 20, I don't know. I, the situation where I think more, well, I don't know if more, but where I think, ah, here they do deserve a tip, is, for example, at events, like parties, there's, I don't know, a quinceañera, or a wedding, or whatever. And there's always, well, there are waiters that, like, whatever you need, they'll serve you, let's see, what would you like? No, well, a paloma. Yeah. Or they're around all the time, and you ask them for something and they bring it to you. Yeah. There I say, man, even if they're already getting paid, the truth is they're being very cool. I mean, if whatever you want, they'll bring it to you, well, yes, man, I'll give them 100 pesos there. Well, yes, right? Yeah, it's true. Yeah. I hadn't thought, it's something I never thought about, like when you go to a quinceañera. Uh-huh. Well, there are several guys there, right? Bringing you more, rum, I don't know, whatever you want to order. Uh-huh. So yeah, it's cool. It's pretty nice to give them something. But yeah, I think we're used to it, at least I am, or maybe you too, to tipping, like you say, even if the service is bad or, I don't know, or unwilling. The truth is, I haven't experienced where I say, man, this waiter treated me so bad, I won't leave a single peso. I haven't experienced that, but sometimes the truth is, it can be quite mediocre, it can be like, ah, it was okay, but nothing extraordinary. Yeah. For me, it's happened that I wanted to leave with zero. Really? Uh-huh, zero, but in the end, I feel guilty and say, ah. Yeah. All right, I'll be a good person, but it hurts. Because I say, man, what am I doing? Incentivizing? What are we incentivizing, right? Uh-huh. Bad service? I mean, you shouldn't, no, I mean, if you're going to do a job, you should try to do it as well as possible, right? Sure. You shouldn't say, ah, man, I mean, what? I deserve something more, right? I deserve, I'm more, then prove it, right? Sure. But if you're a waiter here, then do it well, it's not my fault, right? Yeah. I didn't do anything to you, so I don't understand why, but. Yeah. And look, I sometimes do give more than 10%, huh? I mean, yeah, it's customary to leave 10%, but sometimes yes, I don't know, I leave 15% too. Okay. But, for example, if you go to Mochomos and you spend about 2,000 pesos, would you give them, what, 500 maybe as a tip? If you liked the food. That's a lot of money, right? As a tip. A lot of money, yeah. But well, 10% would be 200. If I'm going to pay 2,000 pesos, honestly, I do get stingy. And I'm going to leave a maximum of 10. Yeah. But, because yes, it's already 200 pesos, man, enough. Yeah, it's more. And I don't know if you saw, I don't know if it was on TikTok or Instagram, a waiter. Uh-huh. That was really mad, man. He said, no way, and someone recorded him because he was like, he had his hands free. And he even put the ticket on the camera. Look, man, a bill of 1,200 pesos, okay? Uh-huh. They left me 28 pesos as a tip. No, you know what? I went and gave it back. I said, I don't want your money, please. That's too much for me. I mean, you don't know if the person doesn't have more, right? Yes, exactly. Maybe they saved up and spent 1,200 and don't have more, right? Sure. Because in the end, it's that, man. It's not mandatory, I mean. No, it's optional and, again, it should be... I don't know, like you say. I remember another time a friend who has a little restaurant asked me for help because she knew she was going to have a lot of people. And she said, hey, can you help out, like wait tables and everything? Uh-huh. And I got a table of some kids. Well, kids, I mean 20-year-olds, you know? 19, 20-year-olds. You can already tell from just looking at them, these guys are not going to leave a peso as a tip. And not because they're mean, man. They're kids, man. They probably have a part-time job in a call center where maybe they don't get paid that well. And, well, yeah, I mean, you don't always have to expect, I don't know, I feel like doing, or well, I don't know if you live off that. Sure. Maybe you do expect it, but to get offended, as you say, it's nonsense. No, and then to record yourself and publish a video showing your face and all that. I mean, yeah, maybe waiting tables isn't for you, right? Maybe you should do something else. Yeah. But there are people saying, Héctor, that they have the theory that it's because of the arrival of many Americans. Uh-huh. And that was mentioned by Eva María Beristain. Uh-huh. Shout out to her, though I don't think she is listening, but she interviewed some people and I think they said that the culture of tips, which is getting higher and growing, comes a bit from the Americans. Uh-huh. And then what happens, right? They interview waiters in Roma, Hipódromo, and they say, ah, no, well, it's because the Americans always give me, right? They give me 500 pesos, man. And so they create that standard of saying, oh, well. And I feel that happened in Cancun, man. That's why, and in Oaxaca I would dare to say too. I mean, if you're not a foreigner, it's like, ah, this guy surely won't give me a tip, man, he's stingy. Uh-huh. What do you think? Do you think it could be? Yes, and it's that there are other customs, right? I mean, when I talk to students who live in the States, they say, no, well here the norm is 15 up to 20. Yeah. Percent, right? Yeah. And yes, it's not something, definitely here the locals would never leave, well, I don't know, I'm saying, but, well, yeah, it would be very rare for someone to leave 20% as a tip. Yeah. And yes, and obviously, yeah, it's that it's weird, man, I don't want to say you're spoiling people, but a little yes. I mean, because then, I don't know, only that restaurant is going to look for that target, no? That target audience. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Because it's the target audience that will leave them more tip money. Exactly. So, yeah, it's kind of bad and yes, I would recommend to someone visiting Mexico City or Mexico in general, maybe don't leave such a big tip. I mean, I don't know, it sounds mean, man, but uh-huh, I mean, you can't just come and destabilize the system. No, of course, of course. For everyone, right? Of course, no, no, no, it's simply a matter of, as they say, no? When in Rome, live as the Romans, right? If you're in Mexico, you need to know that here 10% is okay. I mean, no one will give you the cold shoulder for giving the 10%. Maybe if you're in Huntington Beach, California, people will curse you to hell, right? They tell you, look, put that 10% where it fits best. But not here, here it's fine. So, if you arrive here, you know, all cocky, you know, and give the 20%, you create a difficult standard. Yeah. To match, that's all we're saying. Yeah, exactly. And look, I feel that too, those restaurants where they expect that kind of tip, yeah, I mean, it's not even aimed at locals anymore. Of course, of course. It's aimed at foreigners. At foreigners. Exactly. And I don't know, and well, I don't know if it's good or bad, but local people won't step foot there. And I don't know, maybe it is what it is. Yeah, yeah. I remember a restaurant I went to, it was a restaurant, well, I don't know, it wasn't so fancy, man, but maybe it was for foreigners and, well, it was a Japanese restaurant, man. I don't remember the name, I would like to shame it, but. Alma Negra. Oh no, that's ours. No, no, well, let's say that the bill comes, well, you know now they bring you an iPad, and it said, well, I paid my part, I went with a group and the waiter asks, oh no, when he was talking about the tip, he gives me the iPad, okay? And then one of those like, I mean, only on the iPad there were three options. Uh-huh, the classic. Multiple choice. Uh-huh, like 12, 15, or 20. I mean, the minimum you could leave as a tip was 12. Uh-huh. Or you could manually enter the amount you wanted to put. But even that is very sly, man. I mean. Yeah, very sly. It doesn't even give you the option, I mean, it tells you, here, go and do it yourself and go with an option you don't want. So, you know, if I wanted to give 10, now I have to mentally calculate how much I want to leave. I mean, and those are the places, I think, that, yes, are definitely not looking to have people who don't want to leave. I mean, that absolutely leave minimum. The 12. 12 or 15% tip. Yes, because apart from that, you look a bit stingy, right? If you say, no, I'm going to give you 8 or 5. I mean, technically, you can do it but you'll look bad. Very clever, so I don't know, I don't know. There are also other tips, no? The parking guides. Uh-huh. I think, look, I would say, man, it's already... Get it off your chest. Okay, new cars come with sensors, come with sensors, come with reverse cameras. I think the parking guide is no longer as necessary. Uh-huh. I mean, I don't know, maybe I'm in a bubble. Yes. But sometimes, I mean, I go to the supermarket, buy things. I want to leave in my car. The car warns you, tic, tic, tic, when you're getting close. You see a 4K camera that shows you everything behind you. And having someone whistling. Giving directions. Uh-huh, confuses me more, man. Uh-huh. So, sometimes I say, ah, I mean. No, you're at a supermarket, man. I mean, what's going to happen here? I mean, I understand if you're in, I don't know, in a street in Mexico City where the music stores were, mesones or what was it called. Uh-huh. On a street like that with lots of people, parking meters. There you say, well, lend me a hand, right? Of course. But I think, man, there must be some other use of human intellect better. Yes. Than parking guides. I mean, I think it's a waste of human talent. Yes. Especially today when you can see everything there is. Sure. Cars now have technology and everything. I don't know. Yes. What do you think? I feel here, I mean, they do lend a hand, right? Uh-huh. They help you park, for instance, or leave. But also, I don't know, as you say, maybe if you were in a place, I don't know, for example, I went downtown last weekend and it was packed, man. I mean full of people. On top of that, there was an event of who knows what and a demonstration. Cars everywhere. And there I say, okay, well maybe in this situation it is. I mean, it is necessary to have parking guides, right? They tell you, okay, you're going out now or wait, the other one is leaving. There yes, man. And now they claim that, well, it's like they do you a favor. But mainly it's like they're checking, in quotes, supposedly, that nothing happens to your car and stuff. But, I mean, surely, I don't know, you get out and those guys leave, right? And later, three hours later, there will be another person who doesn't even know who you are or your car and it doesn't matter. Exactly. Exactly. And if you arrive and the headlights were stolen just imagine if he will take responsibility because he told you that, no way, man. No, no, boss, well too bad, right? So, I don't know. Also, valets, I don't really like that. Why? And because, man, it's my car. With all respect, I prefer you don't get in my car. I'd rather park it myself. Tell me where to park and I'll do it. I mean, really, for many reasons. Among them, personal hygiene, for example. So, I say, I don't like it, but on top of that, you have to tip after. No, and they charge you. I mean, valet is mandatory, man. No, if you leave your car with valet, they will charge you minimum 50 pesos. Exactly. 40 pesos maybe. Uh-huh. And then, well, an extra 30 pesos, come on. So, you're like, man. So, I think, I don't know. Or those who open for you, you were telling me, right? About the ones at Oxxo. Now you even have to tip at Oxxo. Sometimes, I mean, sometimes there are homeless people outside Oxxo and they just open and close the door for you. Also, super unnecessary. I mean, they don't have to do that job. Maybe they could do something more useful. Yes. But, that's what they... Well, yes. I don't know. What they thought of doing. Yes. And what else. I mean, for example, tips. There I don't care that much, man. But, for instance, in the stands. Yes. A taco stand, for example. Or hamburgers. Whatever you want. And you go, and even if you go and order from the... I mean, almost always there's... If it's a good stand, even sometimes there's a lot of people as if they were waiters, man. They're like, ah look, these are the tacos. Or sometimes it's just with the taco maker you speak directly to. And they almost always have a tip jar, a little container there, you know? Yes. A can, I don't know. And well, it's totally optional, no? If you want, you put five pesos there, two pesos, whatever. But there it's like, it's totally your choice. Yes. And sometimes you say, oh, the treatment is cool here. They call me dude, how many do you want? Blondie, I put a little extra tongue for you. And so, yes you say, yes, I'm going to leave five, ten pesos to these guys. Exactly. But there you're incentivizing good service. It's like, listen, I like, I notice the good service you give me. I want you to keep doing it. Yes. I will give you. But it's totally voluntary. Totally... I mean, you wouldn't leave it if the taco maker were kind of rude to you, right? What do you want? Ah, okay. Like, how are you? Uh-huh, doesn't attend to you quickly. Ah, yes, yes, yes. Yes, that, right? Uh-huh. Even that. I mean, sometimes you arrive, I get there and nobody pays attention. I mean, nobody says, oh, what can I get you today? Yes. That little detail. Yes. Thank you. Hey, what about delivery people? Do you tip delivery people? Ah, the Uber guys? Or whatever, I don't know. Well, maybe not the Amazon ones, but yes, if you order food, I mean, either by an app or you call the store, the restaurant directly. Ah, yes. Yes, yes. Well, personally, not wanting to virtue signal, but I always, 100% of the time, tip delivery people. Ok. And more so if it's raining. Oh, yes. There, yes, man, you have to give. But in general always. Because, I mean, I feel like a... I even feel a bit bad. I say, man, how easy life is now, right? Yes. I mean, you order on your phone a burger with fries and sushi, whatever, and a guy brings it to you from the restaurant on a bike. I mean, you say... Maybe it's because of that I give, to purify myself, to say... Uh-huh. I'm doing some good in return. Uh-huh, yes. For all the damage I've done to the planet, the unicel, everything, being a lazybones who couldn't go to the restaurant, you know? Uh-huh. Yes. No, it's true. I mean, honestly, I... Honestly, I don't always tip. I mean, I don't know. If it's a place that, I mean, it's here five blocks away, man, and it's not a big deal. Surely it will take 35 minutes to bring my order. I mean, honestly, I don't tip. But just, yes, when I see it's a day with a lot of traffic, man, I say, oh, this guy is surely suffering, man, in the heat of Mexico City, the pollution. Rain's about to fall. There yes, I say, no way, yes. Have 20 pesos, man. Yes, no, yes, yes, yes. No, I see them. I've even seen the classic one. They're on the bike and there's like a little puddle. Uh-huh. And a car comes and splashes them. I say, no. I mean, no way. That can't be. That's very bad. But well, there's no more time. All this talk of food got me hungry, man. Yes, I'm hungry, too. Yes, it's time to leave. Anything else, man? Thanks to everyone who listens to us, those who support us through Patreon. If you want, I don't know, to give us something, you can leave us a review. Also on Apple Podcasts. You can check our videos on YouTube. Follow us on Instagram, TikTok. That's all, I think. See you there. See you later, okay? See you, Beto. Cool. Bye. Ay, how beautiful it is to fly at eleven at night. At eleven at night. Ay, how beautiful it is to fly. To soar, to let yourself fall into the arms of a soldier. Into the arms of a soldier, it even makes you want to cry. The witch grabs me, takes me to her house. She cries.